##1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF MANUALS

1.1. Pursuant to Thailand RCAB 85 paragraph 3 (15a) the operator shall ensure that an Operations manual containing information and instructions as may be necessary to enable the operating staff to perform their duties is provided to such staff. The design of these manuals shall observe human factors principles.

1.2. By definition included in the above Act, “operating staff” means the servants and agents employed by the operator, whether or not as members of the crew of the aircraft, to ensure that the flights of the aircraft are conducted in a safe manner, and includes an operator who himself performs these functions.

1.3. It can readily be seen, therefore, that the form and scope of manuals will vary considerably with the nature and complexity of the operator’s organisation and the types of aircraft in use. A “manual” will normally comprise a number of separate volumes, and may well include individual forms such as prepared navigational flight plans supplied by the operator to his crew. Instructions and information to particular groups of operating staff - e.g. Cabin Crew Manual, aircraft crew rostering instructions, safety and accident prevention manual and information on weight and balance supplied to handling agents - are all part of the operations manual. They must all be submitted together with copies of all amendments and temporary instructions. (See paragraph 10 of this chapter on Route Guide).

1.4. The purpose of this Chapter is to give some indication of the manner in which both the specific and general requirements (paragraph 1.1 above) should be met. Only the operation of aircraft will be dealt with; detailed instructions on aircraft maintenance (such as those included in a General Maintenance Manual (GMM) or in Maintenance Schedules) are in Chapter 8 of this AOCR and in the Authority Airworthiness Requirements.

1.5. The operations manual is the primary indication of the standards to be achieved by an operator. Public transport operation is a highly complex matter and must be based on clearly defined standards and procedures. The form and scope of a manual will vary with the size of the undertaking, nature and complexity of the operation. The adequacy of a manual will be assessed largely on this basis.

1.6. Great importance will be attached to the suitability of manuals for regular use by the operating staff and in particular by aircraft crew in flight. For all but the simplest of operations, the division of the manual into a number of separate volumes will be essential. Manuals should be divided in such a way that essential information is immediately available on the flight deck, and extracts or “digests” of information and instructions may sometimes be necessary to supplement drill cards and check lists.

1.7. Each copy of a manual should normally bear a serial number and a list of holders should be maintained by the person responsible for issuing amendments. Where this system is not used, an operator must have satisfactory alternative arrangements for controlling the issue and amendment of manuals. In any case, a method of acknowledgment of receipt of amendments by manual holders should be instituted. Each volume of a manual must be numbered and bear a title and index giving a clear indication of its scope. The title of the person or department responsible for the issue of the manual should also be indicated. At the front of each volume there must be an amendment page to indicate amendment number, date of incorporation, signature or initials of person amending, and page or paragraph affected. Amended pages should be dated. The numbering of pages, sections, paragraphs, etc. must be orderly and systematic so as to facilitate immediate identification of any part of the subject matter. The standard of printing, duplicating, binding, section dividers, indexing of sections, etc. must be sufficient to enable the document to be read without difficulty and to ensure that it remains intact and legible during normal use.

1.8. The operator shall submit its Operations manual and subsequent amendments to the Authority for the acceptance or approval, as applicable, before issuing them to their users. The purpose of the acceptance and approval process is to verify the adequacy of the operator’s systems and procedures for keeping instructions and information under review and for issuing timely amendments as necessary. Evidence of such process are normally supported by the date, stamp and signature of an Authorized Officer. The operator is responsible for ensuring the accuracy and adequacy of the information provided in the manuals. It must be clearly understood by the operator that this responsibility rest solely with the operator who should designate a suitably qualified person or persons to ensure that this responsibility is properly discharged.

1.9. The amendment of the manuals in manuscript will not be acceptable. Any changes or additions, however slight they may be, should normally be incorporated by the issue of a fresh or additional page on which the amended materials is clearly indicated. In the cases where amendments related to safety may seek verbal approval in principle followed by the formal process in writing.

1.10. An operator shall provide, for the use and guidance of operations personnel concerned, an operations manual structured in accordance with Appendix K2. This operation manual shall be acceptable to the Authority and shall be amended or revised as is necessary to ensure that the information contained therein is kept up to date. All such amendments or revisions shall be issued to all personnel that are required to use this manual.

1.11. All operators are required to have adequate procedures to ensure that the flight manual is updated by implementing changes made mandatory or approved by the State of Registry.

1.12. The form and scope of manuals will vary considerably with the nature and complexity of the operator’s Organization and types of aircraft in use. An operations manual shall be organized with the following structure, as provided in ICAO Annex 6 Part I Appendix 2:

  (a) General;
  (b) Aircraft operating information;
  (c) Areas, routes and aerodromes; and (d) Training

Operations manuals and other standing instructions must be supplemented by a systematic procedure for bringing urgent or purely temporary information to the notice of operating staff and agents. This can be achieved by a numbered series of instructions or notices issued by or under the direct authority of a senior operations official. When the issue of a temporary instruction entails amendment of a standing instruction, the amendment must be made without undue delay and periodical check lists issued to show which of the temporary instructions are current. These instructions bring significant Aeronautical Information Circulars (AICs), NOTAMS, or changes in Aerodrome Operating Minima (AOM) for example, to the attention of crews, operating staff and the operator’s agents.
